README.md, before:

# pwa_ble_client_time_series_data

A HTML, CSS and JS Progressive Web App (PWA) as a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Client for Time Series Data.

## Introduction

This repository is an example project to implement a PWA as a BLE client. The client reads time series data from a BLE server.

We implement the PWA client using HTML, CSS and JS. No build step is required to deploy the code in the [src](./src) directory. We use [deno] to testing, static analysis and documentation purposes.

## Getting Started

You need to install the following requirements:

- A browser compatible with PWAs (I use Chrome)
- [deno]
- [Docker] (with [Docker Compose])

> [!NOTE]
> In Chrome you may need to active the `Experimental Web Platform Features` flag to enable bluetooth (see [How to Enable Experimental Web Platform Features in Chrome Browser]).

As an example we deploy the code from the [src](./src) directory to a [nginx] service in a [Docker Compose] environment. You can start the [Docker Compose] with the following command:

```bash
docker compose up
```

Further details on the deployment can be found in the [Deployment](#deployment) section.

## Documentation

The following diagram illustrates the architecture.

```mermaid
C4Container
    title Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Architecture

    System_Boundary(mobile_device, "Mobile Device") {
        Container(pwa_client, "PWA Bluetooth Client", "Progressive Web App", "Runs in a browser on the mobile device, uses Web Bluetooth API to connect and receive data.")
    }

    Container(bluetooth_server, "Bluetooth Server", "Hardware/Software Device", "Sends data packets using BLE protocol.")

    Rel(bluetooth_server, pwa_client, "Sends Data Packets", "Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)")
```

The system consists of two primary components:

Bluetooth Client (PWA): This client is implemented as a Progressive Web App (PWA). PWAs are web applications that can offer an app-like experience, including offline capabilities and access to certain device features when running in a compatible browser. In this architecture, the PWA runs within a web browser on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). It leverages the Web Bluetooth API (or similar browser-level Bluetooth access) to interact with BLE devices.

Bluetooth Server: This is a separate hardware device or software running on a device that acts as a BLE peripheral. It's responsible for broadcasting data packets to the BLE client.

Communication Flow
The communication between the client and server is primarily one-way, from the server to the client, utilizing the Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) protocol.

BLE Protocol: Both the client and server communicate using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), which is designed for low power consumption and is ideal for small, periodic data transfers.

Packet Transmission: The Bluetooth server continuously sends data packets.

Client Reception: The PWA client, running on the mobile device, scans for and connects to the Bluetooth server. Once connected, it receives the incoming data packets.

Unidirectional Data Flow: Aside from the initial BLE connection establishment and protocol-level acknowledgements, the application-level data flow is from the server to the client. The client does not send application-specific data back to the server.

This architecture is suitable for scenarios where a mobile application needs to passively receive sensor data, notifications, or other information from a BLE-enabled device.

### Architecture Decisions

#### ADR 1 - Plain HTML, CSS and JS to implement PWA

I implement the PWA in plain HTML, CSS and JS. The files can be served as static (file) resources.

**Advantages:**

- Static files can be served platform indipendent
- Standard web technologies are quite sustainable
- I don't have to learn a fancy framework

**Disadvantages:**

- No fancy server side features
- Tooling is not as nice for JS development

I have the following considerations for the JS development:

I want to have good static analysis, testing and documentation capabilities. For this purpose I use [deno] to implement [testing](#testing) and [linting](#linting). But [deno] is not a browser environment. This means that the access to some global variables (especially the DOM) is not possible. On the other hand syntax for imports is not supported in browser environments. Because of this I keep the following in mind for JS development:

- I use the [app.js](./src/app.js) file access to the DOM
- I don't write test with [deno] for the [app.js](./src/app.js) file
- I write util files that can be tested with [deno] (see [utils.js](./src/utils.js))
- I can't use imports in util files
- I have to import the util files via script tags in the [index.html](./src/index.html) (before the [app.js](./src/app.js) script tag)

#### ADR 2 - Plain HTML, CSS and JS to implement PWA

I wont implement a build step to create the static files (HTML, CSS, JS, PNG, JSON) that are served as the PWA. This goes in line with [ADR 1](#adr-1---plain-html-css-and-js-to-implement-pwa).

**Advantages:**

- No added complexity via build step
- Files are always human readable

**Disadvantages:**

- Files can't be minimized
- No advantages from frameworks (like imports in JS files)
- File paths for PWA cache through service worker have to be updated manually in [sw.js](./src/sw.js)

## Development

### Preview

During development (in VSCode) you can use the `Live Server` extension (see extension recommendations) to open a live preview of the PWA. Right click on the [index.html](./src/index.html) file and select `Open with Live Server` to open a preview in your browser. This preview will automatically reload if changes are detected.

### Testing

You can use the [deno] testing command to execute the tests:

```bash
deno test
```

### Linting

You can use the [deno] testing command to execute the tests:

```bash
deno lint
```

## Deployment

### Deployment using Docker Compose

You can deploy the code from the [src](./src) directory to a [nginx] service in a [Docker Compose] environment. You can start the [Docker Compose] with the following command:

```bash
docker compose up
```

This deployment uses a read-only volume mount to the source directory to get the source files.

## Sources

- [deno]
- [Docker]
- [Docker Compose]
- [nginx]
- [How to Enable Experimental Web Platform Features in Chrome Browser]

[deno]: https://deno.com/
[Docker]: https://www.docker.com/
[Docker Compose]: https://docs.docker.com/compose/
[nginx]: https://nginx.org/en/
[How to Enable Experimental Web Platform Features in Chrome Browser]: https://techviral.net/enable-experimental-web-platform-features-in-chrome/

Commit message:

i can use js imports now

README.md, after:

# pwa_ble_client_time_series_data

A HTML, CSS and JS Progressive Web App (PWA) as a Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Client for Time Series Data.

## Introduction

This repository is an example project to implement a PWA as a BLE client. The client reads time series data from a BLE server.

We implement the PWA client using HTML, CSS and JS. No build step is required to deploy the code in the [src](./src) directory. We use [deno] to testing, static analysis and documentation purposes.

## Getting Started

You need to install the following requirements:

- A browser compatible with PWAs (I use Chrome)
- [deno]
- [Docker] (with [Docker Compose])

> [!NOTE]
> In Chrome you may need to active the `Experimental Web Platform Features` flag to enable bluetooth (see [How to Enable Experimental Web Platform Features in Chrome Browser]).

As an example we deploy the code from the [src](./src) directory to a [nginx] service in a [Docker Compose] environment. You can start the [Docker Compose] with the following command:

```bash
docker compose up
```

Further details on the deployment can be found in the [Deployment](#deployment) section.

## Documentation

The following diagram illustrates the architecture.

```mermaid
C4Container
    title Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) Architecture

    System_Boundary(mobile_device, "Mobile Device") {
        Container(pwa_client, "PWA Bluetooth Client", "Progressive Web App", "Runs in a browser on the mobile device, uses Web Bluetooth API to connect and receive data.")
    }

    Container(bluetooth_server, "Bluetooth Server", "Hardware/Software Device", "Sends data packets using BLE protocol.")

    Rel(bluetooth_server, pwa_client, "Sends Data Packets", "Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE)")
```

The system consists of two primary components:

Bluetooth Client (PWA): This client is implemented as a Progressive Web App (PWA). PWAs are web applications that can offer an app-like experience, including offline capabilities and access to certain device features when running in a compatible browser. In this architecture, the PWA runs within a web browser on a mobile device (e.g., smartphone or tablet). It leverages the Web Bluetooth API (or similar browser-level Bluetooth access) to interact with BLE devices.

Bluetooth Server: This is a separate hardware device or software running on a device that acts as a BLE peripheral. It's responsible for broadcasting data packets to the BLE client.

Communication Flow
The communication between the client and server is primarily one-way, from the server to the client, utilizing the Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE) protocol.

BLE Protocol: Both the client and server communicate using Bluetooth Low Energy (BLE), which is designed for low power consumption and is ideal for small, periodic data transfers.

Packet Transmission: The Bluetooth server continuously sends data packets.

Client Reception: The PWA client, running on the mobile device, scans for and connects to the Bluetooth server. Once connected, it receives the incoming data packets.

Unidirectional Data Flow: Aside from the initial BLE connection establishment and protocol-level acknowledgements, the application-level data flow is from the server to the client. The client does not send application-specific data back to the server.

This architecture is suitable for scenarios where a mobile application needs to passively receive sensor data, notifications, or other information from a BLE-enabled device.

### Architecture Decisions

#### ADR 1 - Plain HTML, CSS and JS to implement PWA

I implement the PWA in plain HTML, CSS and JS. The files can be served as static (file) resources.

**Advantages:**

- Static files can be served platform indipendent
- Standard web technologies are quite sustainable
- I don't have to learn a fancy framework

**Disadvantages:**

- No fancy server side features
- Tooling is not as nice for JS development

I have the following considerations for the JS development:

I want to have good static analysis, testing and documentation capabilities. For this purpose I use [deno] to implement [testing](#testing) and [linting](#linting). But [deno] is not a browser environment. This means that the access to some global variables (especially the DOM) is not possible. Because of this I keep the following in mind for JS development:

- I use the [app.js](./src/app.js) file access to the DOM
- I don't write test with [deno] for the [app.js](./src/app.js) file
- I write util files that can be tested with [deno] (see [utils.js](./src/utils.js))
- I have to import the util files via script tags in the [index.html](./src/index.html) (before the [app.js](./src/app.js) script tag)

#### ADR 2 - Plain HTML, CSS and JS to implement PWA

I wont implement a build step to create the static files (HTML, CSS, JS, PNG, JSON) that are served as the PWA. This goes in line with [ADR 1](#adr-1---plain-html-css-and-js-to-implement-pwa).

**Advantages:**

- No added complexity via build step
- Files are always human readable

**Disadvantages:**

- Files can't be minimized
- No advantages from frameworks (like imports in JS files)
- File paths for PWA cache through service worker have to be updated manually in [sw.js](./src/sw.js)

## Development

### Preview

During development (in VSCode) you can use the `Live Server` extension (see extension recommendations) to open a live preview of the PWA. Right click on the [index.html](./src/index.html) file and select `Open with Live Server` to open a preview in your browser. This preview will automatically reload if changes are detected.

### Testing

You can use the [Deno CLI Test Command] to execute the tests:

```bash
deno test
# Also run documentation tests
deno test --doc
```

Refer to the documentation for more details on [Deno Documentation Tests].

### Linting

You can use the [Deno CLI Lint Command] to execute the static analysis:

```bash
deno lint
```

## Deployment

### Deployment using Docker Compose

You can deploy the code from the [src](./src) directory to a [nginx] service in a [Docker Compose] environment. You can start the [Docker Compose] with the following command:

```bash
docker compose up
```

This deployment uses a read-only volume mount to the source directory to get the source files.

## Sources

- [deno]
- [Docker]
- [Docker Compose]
- [nginx]
- [How to Enable Experimental Web Platform Features in Chrome Browser]
- [Deno CLI Test Command]
- [Deno Documentation Tests]
- [Deno CLI Lint Command]

[deno]: https://deno.com/
[Docker]: https://www.docker.com/
[Docker Compose]: https://docs.docker.com/compose/
[nginx]: https://nginx.org/en/
[How to Enable Experimental Web Platform Features in Chrome Browser]: https://techviral.net/enable-experimental-web-platform-features-in-chrome/
[Deno CLI Test Command]: https://docs.deno.com/runtime/reference/cli/test/
[Deno Documentation Tests]: https://docs.deno.com/runtime/reference/documentation/
[Deno CLI Lint Command]: https://docs.deno.com/runtime/reference/cli/lint/
